Abstract

Background: Due to the high rates of dissemination around the world and potential severity, SARS-CoV-2 has been causing an abnormal demand for ICUs, which have economic effects still unknown on the public and private healthcare.
Methods: A retrospective study of 544 patients admitted in the ICU of Moinhos de Vento Hospital, a private hospital from Southern Brazil, analyzed the differences in costs between patients diagnosed with Covid-19 and those with other causes. Mann-Whitney statistical tests and distribution plots were used to analyze these differences. Ordinary Least Squares, with the variables age, length of stay, and severity, was applied to assess the influence of Covid-19 on the ICU costs.
Findings: From 544 hospitalizations, 40 were identified with Covid-19. The median length of stay for patients suffering from Covid-19 was seven days (IQR = 3·3-32·5) and two days (IQR = 1-5) for non-Covid-19 patients (p-value <0.1%). The main differences were found in the costs of medicines and materials (p-value <0.1%). The median of total hospitalization costs with Covid-19 was BRL 51,752 (IQR = 16,764-149,479) and BRL 9,935 (IQR = 6,431-19,771) for non-Covid-19 causes. The highest cost differences were found in males older than 60 years (p-value <0.1%). Direct costs showed strong elasticity with severity, 2,327 (95% CI 1,866-2,789) for all patients and 2,067 (95% CI 343-3,791) for hospitalizations with Covid-19. Econometric evidence showed that hospitalizations by Covid-19 increase the direct costs of ICU by 35% (95% CI 10-67%).
Interpretation: We have shown that patients diagnosed with Covid-19 added a significant amount of costs in the ICU due to the extended length of stay and severity, particularly because of the high use of medicines and materials, which can be inferred from the damage caused by infection and the lack of knowledge about the proper treatment for this new coronavirus.
Funding: This study was partially funded by the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel - Brazil (CAPES), partially funded by CNPq, the Brazilian Agency for Scientific Research and by the Faculty of Health Sciences of the Hospital Moinhos de Vento.

#Here you will find the database, test script and econometric models, to use the files, recommend using the Stata software
